---
layout: post
title: Loss functions
tags: ML optimization
---

This post is a simple summary of some common loss functions, and their relations
to maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). 
Given the data $$\{ ({\bf x}_i, {\bf y}_i) \}_i$$,
and model parameters $\theta$,
we define a general loss function as

$$ \mathcal{L}(\{ \theta \}) = 
\frac1N \sum_{i=1}^N 
c(\theta; {\bf x}_i, {\bf y}_i) $$

We also assume that that model make the predictions 
$${\bf f}(\theta; {\bf x}_i)$$.

## Regression

In a regression setting, a very common choice is a least-square loss function,
or $L_2$ loss function,
i.e.,

$$ c(\theta; {\bf x}_i, {\bf y}_i) 
= \frac12 \| {\bf f}(\theta; {\bf x}_i) - {\bf y}_i \|^2
$$

To calculate the gradient of the loss function, we need the partial derivative
of $c$ with respect to the output of the model $f$, which in this case is 

$$ \frac{\partial c(\theta; {\bf x}_i, {\bf y}_i)}{\partial {\bf f}(\theta; {\bf
x}_i)} =  {\bf f}(\theta; {\bf x}_i) - {\bf y}_i $$

The main advantage of that loss function is its simplicity. Linear regression
with that loss function can be solved analytically. The least-square loss
function is twice differentiable everywhere. In the case of a model with
Gaussian noise, it also connects with MLE. Indeed, if we assume that the true
model is

$$ {\bf y}_i = {\bf f}(\theta; {\bf x}_i) + \varepsilon $$

with $\varepsilon$ having a normal distribution with mean zero, then minus the
log-likelihood is given by

$$ \frac{n}2 \log(2 \pi \sigma^2) + \frac1{2\sigma^2} \sum_i 
\| {\bf f}(\theta; {\bf x}_i) - {\bf y}_i \|^2 $$

A disadvantage of the least-square loss function is its sensitivity to outliers.
Indeed, if the $$k^\text{th}$$ data point is an outlier, the square deviation
will dominate the loss function and during the training phase, the optimization
will give too much importance to that data point in an attempt to minimize the
loss function. This is related to the fact that the least-square targets the
mean of the distribution, which is sensitive to outliers.

This is in contrast to the $L_1$ loss function, which targets the median the
distribution, and is

$$ c(\theta; {\bf x}_i, {\bf y}_i) 
= | {\bf f}(\theta; {\bf x}_i) - {\bf y}_i |
$$

The main disadvantage of the $L_1$ loss function is its numerical difficulties.
It is non-differentiable at the origin, and requires specific techniques to be
handled.



# Binary classifier

Typically loss functions for binary classification derive from MLE. Assuming the
binary classes are $$y_i \in \{0,1\}$$, and assuming that the classifier
returns a function $$f({\bf x}_i) \in [0,1]$$ which can be interpreted as 
$$\mathcal{P}[f({\bf x}_i) = 1 | \theta]$$, then the likelihood function is
given by

$$ \prod_i 
(f({\bf x}_i))^{y_i}
(1-f({\bf x}_i))^{1-y_i} $$

Therefore the negative log-likelihood is

$$ - \sum_i y_i \log(f({\bf x}_i)) + (1-y_i) \log(1-f({\bf x}_i)) $$

Let's look at an example. In the case of a logistic regression, the model is
given by

$$ f({\bf x}_i) = \frac1{1 + e^{-{\bf x}_i^T \theta}} $$

In that case, the negative log-likelihood is

$$ \begin{align*}
& = y_i \log (1 + e^{-{\bf x}_i^T \theta})
-(1-y_i) (-{\bf x}_i^T \theta - \log(1 + e^{-{\bf x}_i^T \theta}) \\
& = - y_i {\bf x}_i^T \theta +  \log(1 + e^{+{\bf x}_i^T \theta}) 
\end{align*} $$


In the case we have multiple classes $$y_i \in \{0,1,\dots,K-1\}$$ and multiple
outputs $${\bf f}({\bf x}_i) \in [0,1]^K$$, 
and all outputs are mutually exclusive (i.e., they always sum to $1$, as is the
case when using softmax in a neural network), the loss function
is typically defined as

$$ c(\theta; {\bf x}_i, y_i) = - \log( {\bf f}({\bf x}_i)_{y_i} ) $$

In that case, the partial derivative of the $c$ with respect to the output of
the model is

$$ \frac{\partial c(\theta; {\bf x}_i, y_i)}{\partial {\bf f}(\theta; {\bf x}_i)} =  
[\dots,0,- 1/{\bf f}({\bf x}_i)_{y_i},0,\dots]^T
$$
