---
layout: post
title: Using Borgy
tags: borgy hpc
---

I'll summarize the steps I followed to get running with Borgy.

## Creating a Unix account.
This is not mentioned anywhere in the documentation (for now), but you need to
first create a Unix account with our HPC team. To do that, check out the
following Confluence
[page](https://elementai.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/IT/pages/255164665/Secure+SSH+Keys+Creation+Standard).

## Installing the borgy command
This is described in this Confluence
[page](http://docs.borgy.elementai.lan/pages/tutorial.html#install-the-cli). I
did it by downloading the executable, then moving it to the right folder (in
your PATH).
Once this is done, you can log in to Borgy,
```
borgy login --uid <your_unix_account>
```
then submit a simple one-command job, for instance
```
borgy submit -- whoami
```
You can monitor that job by either doing
```
borgy info
```
which will give all the info about your most recent job,
or
```
borgy ps
```
which will summarize all the jobs your started in the recent past (can be
modified to check different users,...).

## ssh to Borgy
You can ssh to Borgy's login node. Andrei sent a nice script, that you name
`config`, and place in your `~/.ssh` folder,
```
Host borgy
HostName dc1-8gpu-01
User bencrestel
IdentityFile /Users/bencrestel/.ssh/sshkey
```
This requires that you place your private ssh key in the directory defined as
`IdentityFile`.
Next, you can ssh to Borgy by simply doing
```
ssh borgy
```
And you can copy files to Borgy by doing, on your laptop,
```
scp <my_local_file> borgy:/home/bencrestel
```
if you want to copy a file in your home directory.

## Running jobs on Borgy
Once you ssh to Borgy, you can also scp and move files their. There is a neat
alternative to that manual process which relied on sshfs, but I haven't been
able to get it running yet.

Where to place your files? There are different directories. But it seems the
right place is ````/mnt/home/bencrestel````which will be accessible from any
node. You have 500Gb available there, which doesn't seem too bad.
Then, the following command load a Docker image including pytorch, request 1 GPU
node, set your home directory to ````/mnt/home````, then run some bash commands:
navigate to a specific folder, when run a python file:
```
borgy submit \
	-i images.borgy.elementai.lan/nvcr.io/pytorch-gpu-jupyter:18.09-py3-latest \
	--mem 32 --gpu 1 --gpu-mem 32 --cuda-version 10.0 \
	-H -w /mnt/home/ \
	-- bash -c "cd bencrestel/pytorch/examples/mnist && python main.py --epochs 1 > test.out"
```

