---
layout: post
title: Setting up my MacBook Pro
tags: mac
---

I received a Mac for work. It's beautiful, it's fancy, and I have no idea how to use it. I'm going to summarize here the steps I followed to set up my laptop, in particular getting git, python, and a compile environment.

## Git
First up, **git** of course. Mac does not ship with an equivalent of apt-get, but you can install one of several package managers. I went for [Homebrew](https://docs.brew.sh/Installation). 
I didn't want to have to install it in sudo mode (not sure this was such a big deal, in the end), so I decided to install it in my personal folder (/Users/local). 
But to make it possible to execute the softwares installed via Homebrew from any directory, I had to add the path to the directory where I installed Homebrew to my PATH. 
This is done by modifying the file paths
```
sudo vim /etc/paths
```
Also, during the install, I had to install the command-line tools from XCode. This part was handled automatically by Mac App Store.
Once Homebrew was installed, I updated and upgraded
```
brew update
brew upgrade
```

With Homebrew installed, I can next install git with a simple command
```
brew install git
```
This installation of git ships with a bunch of other app, like gitk. The latter requires to have jdk installed, which I did from the website (can't find the link now).

Next, I need autocomplete to make it work. For that you can simply install bash-completion
```
brew install bash-completion
```
Then you need to point you bashrc file to that command. 

## Docker
Still using Homebrew, I could install **docker**. However to have the nice Docker GUI with it, 
I had to use cask,
```
brew cask install docker
```


## Jekyll
Jekyll is nice to power simple, efficient blogs. You install via Ruby, and the instructions provided [here](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/installation/macos/) were sufficient, except for a few jekyll modules (jekyll-gist, jekyll-seo-tag,...) which I had to install using gem again. But it worked in the end.

## pipenv
Next, and still using Homebrew, I installed **pipenv**, which seems to be a nice lightweight environment manager that can be useful for software development. A nice little intro [video](https://pipenv.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is posted on that website.

## pyenv
Pyenv is meant to be a simpler way to define environments. I installed via Homebrew. Then to create a Python 3.6 environment, you do
```
pyenv init
pyenv install 3.6.0
```
Note: It never worked for me
