---
layout: post
title: How-to Poetry
tags: python poetry
---

Poetry is a way to manage virtual environment in Python, a bit similar to
Anaconda.
The way it is being using in t-s is that there is a `pyproject.toml` file and a
lock file in the root of the repo, which means you can just `poetry install` to
create the virtualenv. By default, the "extras" dependencies will not be
installed. To install those, you instaed need to do `poetry install --extras "<name of
package>"`; this is equivalent to doing `poetry install` and on top of that
installing the extra dependencies requested.
When you update the version of certain dependencies, you can update you poetry
environment by doing `poetry install`.
To add new dependencies without modifying the `pyproject.toml`, you can do
`poetry add <name_of_dependency>`.

Once you're all set up, you can run some commands inside your virtual
environment. For instance, to run `ipython`, you would do
```
poetry run ipython
```
To start a jupyter notebook session, you would do
```
poetry run jupyter-notebook
```

Their [documentation](https://poetry.eustace.io/docs/cli/) is pretty good.

# How to add a dependency
The first time you create a `pyproject.toml` file and you run `poetry install`,
poetry will resolve all the conflicts and save the version of each dependency in
a lock file, `poetry.lock`. You should version control both files.

If you want to add a new dependency, add it in the `poetry.toml` file then run
`poetry install`, which will update the lock file and commit both.

Because `poetry` resolves conflicts for you, you will not necessarily have, in
your lock file, the latest verison of all dependencies as requested in your
`pyproject.toml` file. If you want to update your dependencies, you need to run
`poetry update`, which will effectively delete your lock file and installing
again.

Note that sometimes, adding directly into the `pyproject.toml` file doesn't work
(SolverProblemError...version solving failed) even though `poetry` should be
able to find it. The workaround (which is a
[bug](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry/issues/1281)) is to install that
dependency via `poetry add <dependency>`. This let `poetry` add that dependency
to the `.toml` file then resolves conflicts in the `.lock` file.
