---
layout: post
title: Literature on GANs
tags: ML deeplearning gan
---

GANs are a popular types of generative models that attemps to approximate a
probabilty distribution. It does so by setting up a game between 2 agents, one
that is tasked with generating samples (the generator), and one that is tasked
with deciding whether samples generated are real or fake (the discriminator).
The tyical setup uses deep nets as both generator and discriminator, and each
have different cost functions. They are trained by alternating optimization
steps on each.

One criticism is that the distribution learned by GANs have a very-low support,
and therefore only learn a low-dimensional subset of the target distribution. This is
discussed in [Do GANs actually learn the distribution? An empirical
study](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08224).

There exists different architecture for GANs. In [Are GANs Created Equal? A
Large-Scale
Study](http://papers.nips.cc/paper/7350-are-gans-created-equal-a-large-scale-study),
the authors compare different GANs and find no consistent, meaningful difference
among those. They also propose some ways to compare GANs; another paper in that
direction is [Assessing Generative Models via Precision and
Recall](http://papers.nips.cc/paper/7769-assessing-generative-models-via-precision-and-recall).

This
[article](https://towardsdatascience.com/gan-ways-to-improve-gan-performance-acf37f9f59b)
discusses a few workaround to some of the biggest pitfalls of GANs, namely:
* mode collapse
* non-convergence (oscillation)
* vanishing gradient (when discriminator is over-confident)

Unfortunately, I find most of the solutions to be ad-hoc solutions, like duct
tape, not really trying to address the underlying problems.
This article still has some merit, at least as a nice concise summary of the
current state of research (e.g., summarize all cost functions used in GANs).
