---
layout: post
title: Notes for CNN course by deeplearning.ai (week 4)
tags: cnn course deeplearning
---

This week focuses on Face Recognition and Neural Style Transfer.

## Video: What is face recognition?

Verification vs Recognition?
Verification means you have a tuple (image, name) and you must return whether
they correspond to the same person or not.

Recognition means you have K persons in your database and given an input image
you try to detect whether that image belongs to one of the K persons in your
database.

You actually need very high accurate verification systems to be able to do
recognition systems. As you are basically running a recognition K times. So you
have K more chances to make an error. This is why recognition is typically
considered a much harder problem. 

Also, face recognition is one-shot learning problem. You typically have a single
example of each face, and you want to train a face recognition algorithm from
that.

## Video: One Shot Learning

The challenge with face recognition is that you have very little samples (1 per
individual). That is a one shot learning problem. 

You cannot solve it as a typical object/face recognition problem. Instead what
you can do is train a network to return a similarity function between a given
input image and each of the individuals you have in your database (+ category
"unknown"). And you can decide of a threshold under which you declare a match
between the input and a person in your db.

## Video: Siamese Network

You can define 2 identical networks (same parameters -> siamese)) that will each take a face image as input,
pass it through a set of conv nets, then fc layers, then output a vector (say,
128-d vector). Then you can define similarity between both faces as
$\| f(x_1) - f(x_2)\|^2$

## Video: Triplet Loss

Loss is defined from a triplet of 3 images. Using the notion of margin (support
vector margin), you define a positive float $\alpha$, then you want to have
$\| f(A) - f(P)\|^2 - \| f(A) - f(N)\|^2 + \alpha \leq 0$, where A=anchor, P=positive,
N=negative. Actually, since we don't need this to be extremely negative, we just
want this to less than zero. So to avoid having the network pushing on a corner
case, we take $max(\|.... + \alpha, 0)$.

To train that system, you need to have multiple faces per person (so not really
one shot....). Then when selecting the triplet, you want to select triplet such
that the 2 norm diff are actually close to each other. So that it forces the
network to learn something.
That is to say, you don't pick A, P, N at random.

## Video: Face Verification and Binary Classification

Face recognition can also be posed as a binary classification problem, by taking
the same idea of 2 siamese networks, then passing both 128-d output vectors to a
logistic regression unit (maybe passing the absolute value of the entry-wise
difference between both 128-d vectors). There are also variants.

Notice that you can pre-compute the encodings for all people in your database,
so that you only have to compute the encodings for the face you are trying to
recognize (at inference time).
This will speed up computation time.

## Video: What is neural style transfer?

To implement style transfer, you need to understand (and use) the features
extracted by the different layers of a convnet. But for that, you need to
understand what is being extracted.

## Video: What are deep ConvNets learning?

Typically, layers detect from coarser to finer details as you go deeper into the
convnet.

## Video: Cost Function

Cost function is the sum of a content cost function and a style cost function,
both measuring the similarity between the generated image and the content image
or style image.

The image is generated by applying gradient descent
directly to the generated image, starting from a random image. 

## Video: Content Cost Function

The content is defined as the squared norm of the difference between the activation of both
content (input) image and generated image, at a given layer of a pre-trained
ConvNet. The choice of what layer activation you are using is decided by how
much granularity you want to preserve in the generated image.

## Video: Style Cost

As for the content cost function, you pick a layer from your ConvNet, then work
with the activation function of that layer.

The style of an image is defined via its Style matrix, which is an $n_c \times
n_c$ matrix where each entry is the point-wise multiplication of all activations
of each channel. In the video, they call that the correlation between both
channel; that'd be true if the channels all had zero means.
$$ G_{k,k'} = \sum_i \sum_j a_{ijk} a_{ijk'}$$.

You calculate the style matrix for the style image and the generated image. The
style cost function is defined as the squared Frobenius norm of the difference
between both style matrices.
Except that there is a normalization constant in front (but there is another
multiplicative factor in front of the cost function).

Actually, the overall style cost function is a weighted sum of the style cost
function of each individual layer.

The overall cost function is the weighted sum of the content cost function and
the style cost function. Then you minimize your cost function (gradient descent,
or other optimizer) by changing the generated image.

## Video: 1D and 3D Generalizations

Show how convolutional layers can be used on 1d and 3d data, not just 2d data.
